Feature/develop2 python requires (#2958)
conan-io/docs: reference/extensions/python_requires.rst

.. _reference_extensions_python_requires:

Python requires
===============

Introduction
------------

> The ``python_requires`` feature is a very convenient way to share files and code between

Author: yes, files, any file.

> different recipes. A python requires is a special recipe that do not create packages and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
different recipes. A python require is a special recipe that does not create packages and
```

> different recipes. A python requires is a special recipe that do not create packages and
> it is just intended to be reused by other recipes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
different recipes. A python requires is a special recipe that does not create packages and
is just intended to be reused by other recipes.
```

A very simple recipe that we want to reuse could be:

.. code-block:: python
    
    from conan import ConanFile

>     myvar = 123

Reviewer: that's the scope/life cycle of this `global` (module) variable?
e.g. if one recipe does:
```
self.python_requires["pyreq"].module.myvar = 777
```
will other recipe see this change?

Author: Yes

    def myfunct():
        return 234

    class Pkg(ConanFile):
        name = "pyreq"
        version = "0.1"
        package_type = "python-require"

     
And then we will make it available to other packages with ``conan create .``. Note that a ``python-require``

> package do not create binaries, it is just the recipe part.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
package does not create binaries, it is just the recipe part.
```

.. code-block:: bash

    $ conan create .

>     # It will only export the recipe, but NOT create binaries

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # It will only export the recipe, but will NOT create binaries
```

.. code-block:: python
    
    from conan import ConanFile

    class Pkg(ConanFile):
        name = "pkg"
        version = "0.1"
        python_requires = "pyreq/0.1"

        def build(self):  
            v = self.python_requires["pyreq"].module.myvar  # v will be 123
            f = self.python_requires["pyreq"].module.myfunct()  # f will be 234
            self.output.info(f"{v}, {f}")

.. code-block:: bash

    $ conan create . 
    ...
    pkg/0.1: 123, 234

Python requires can also use version ranges, and this can be recommended in many cases if those ``python-requires``
need to evolve over time:

.. code-block:: python
    
    from conan import ConanFile

    class Pkg(ConanFile):
        python_requires = "pyreq/[>=1.0 <2]"

It is also possible to require more than 1 ``python-requires`` with ``python_requires = "pyreq/0.1", "other/1.2"``

Extending base classes
----------------------

A common use case would be to declare a base class with methods we want to reuse in several
recipes via inheritance. We'd write this base class in a python-requires package: 

.. code-block:: python

    from conan import ConanFile

    class MyBase:
        def source(self):

>             self.output.info("My cool source!")

Reviewer: please add spaces/newlines between functions, it's hard to read like that

        def package(self):
            self.output.info("My cool package!")
        def package_info(self):
            self.output.info("My cool package_info!")

    class PyReq(ConanFile):
        name = "pyreq"
        version = "0.1"
        package_type = "python-require"

And make it available for reuse with:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ conan create .

Note that there are two classes in the recipe file:

 * ``MyBase`` is the one intended for inheritance and doesn't extend ``ConanFile``.
 * ``PyReq`` is the one that defines the current package being exported, it is the recipe
   for the reference ``pyreq/0.1``.

Once the package with the base class we want to reuse is available we can use it in other
recipes to inherit the functionality from that base class. We'd need to declare the
``python_requires`` as we did before and we'd need to tell Conan the base classes to use
in the attribute ``python_requires_extend``. Here our recipe will inherit from the
class ``MyBase``:

.. code-block:: python
    
    from conan import ConanFile

    class Pkg(ConanFile):
        name = "pkg"
        version = "0.1"
        python_requires = "pyreq/0.1"

>         python_requires_extend = "pyreq.MyBase"

Reviewer: can I use `python_requires_extend = "pyreq.MyBase1", "myreq.MyBase2"`?

Author: Yes, but not recommended, read below

The resulting inheritance is equivalent to declare our ``Pkg`` class as ``class Pkg(pyreq.MyBase, ConanFile)``.
So creating the package we can see how the methods from the base class are reused:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ conan create .
    ...
    pkg/0.1: My cool source!
    pkg/0.1: My cool build!
    pkg/0.1: My cool package!
    pkg/0.1: My cool package_info!
    ...

In general, base class attributes are not inherited, and should be avoided as much as possible.
There are method alternatives to some of them like ``export()`` or ``set_version()``.
For exceptional situations, see the ``init()`` method documentation for more information to extend inherited attributes.

Reusing files
-------------

It is possible to access the files exported by a recipe that is used with ``python_requires``.
We could have this recipe, together with a *myfile.txt* file containing the "Hello" text.

.. code-block:: python

    from conan import ConanFile

    class PyReq(ConanFile):
        name = "pyreq"
        version = "1.0"
        package_type = "python-require"
        exports = "*"

.. code-block:: bash

    $ echo "Hello" > myfile.txt
    $ conan create .

> Now the python-require has been created, we can access its path (the place where *myfile.txt* is) with the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now that the python-require has been created, we can access its path (the place where *myfile.txt* is) with the
```

``path`` attribute:

.. code-block:: python

    import os

    from conan import ConanFile
    from conan.tools.files import load

    class Pkg(ConanFile):
        python_requires = "pyreq/0.1"

        def build(self):
            pyreq_path = self.python_requires["pyreq"].path
            myfile_path = os.path.join(pyreq_path, "myfile.txt")
            content = load(self, myfile_path)  # content = "Hello"
            self.output.info(content)
            # we could also copy the file, instead of reading it

> Note that only ``exports`` work for this case, but not ``exports_sources``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that only ``exports`` works for this case, but not ``exports_sources``.
```

Testing python-requires
-----------------------

It is possible to test with ``test_package`` a ``python_require``, by adding a ``test_package/conanfile.py``:

.. code-block:: python
    :caption: conanfile.py

    from conan import ConanFile

    def mynumber():
        return 42

    class PyReq(ConanFile):
        name = "pyreq"
        version = "1.0"
        package_type = "python-require"

.. code-block:: python
    :caption: test_package/conanfile.py

    from conan import ConanFile

>     class Tool(ConanFile):

Reviewer: it probably needs an explicit `test_type` here (and what's the correct one for python requires?)

Author: test_type has been removed in 2.0, not used anymore

Reviewer: but it's not automatically adding requirements in 2.0, right?

Author: No, it has to be explicit (except ``python-requires``)

Reviewer: why except python requires?
